---
related-session: content/Sessions/session-1.md
start_date_and_time: 2021-10-21T06:00:02Z
name: Scientific session and exchange at Université Paris- Saclay
date: October 21st
time: 8am- 8pm
apply_link: ''
attachements: []
youtube_video_id: ''
public: false
side_event_name: ''

---
**8am** Bus departure for Saclay University. Meeting at the Institute (TBC).

**9:45- 12:30am** Scientific session with talks by Jay McClelland and Xiao-Jing Wang

**12:30am- 1:15pm** Wrap-up and authored write-up

**1:15pm- 2pm** Lunch at Saclay

Afternoon program to be confirmed by Saclay

**2pm** Opening remarks on behalf of the university (Michel Guidal and Stéphanie Lacour).

Activities in three areas focusing on themes of Intelligence and Artificial Intelligence:

SSH- Daniela Piana

Health sciences- Stanislas Dehaene (to be confirmed)

Science and Engineering- Nicolas Vayatis (to be confirmed)

**3:15pm** Coffee break

**3:45pm** The three separate workshops continue with more focused discussions between specialists, preceded by a presentation of about 20 minutes by a mentor or fellow of the ICA4; guest star, and possibly a presentation by an academic from Saclay. The presenters, if possible, will get in touch with the mentors in order to prepare the organisation of these workshops in the best conditions.

Expected mentors:

SSH: Karen Yeung

HS: Robert Zatorre

S&E: Toshio Fukuda

**5:30pm** Plenary lecture by Zaven Paré. The conference and the debates will be presented and closed by Pierre Guibentif (TBC), who will present the activities of the MSH Paris-Saclay.

**6:30 pm** Closing of the day, back to Paris by bus is planned for 20:00 latest.